Initial draft content (#1)
NLnetLabs/draft-yorgos-dnsop-dry-run-dnssec: draft-yorgos-dnsop-dry-run-dnssec.md

%%%
Title = "dry-run DNSSEC"
abbrev = "dry-run-dnssec"
docname = "@DOCNAME@"
category = "std"
area = "Internet"
workgroup = "DNSOP Working Group"
date = @TODAY@

[seriesInfo]
name = "Internet-Draft"
value = "@DOCNAME@"
stream = "IETF"
status = "standard"

[[author]]
initials = "Y."
surname = "Thessalonikefs"
fullname = "Yorgos Thessalonikefs"
organization = "NLnet Labs"
[author.address]
 email = "george@nlnetlabs.nl"
[author.address.postal]
 street = "Science Park 400"
 city = "Amsterdam"
 code = "1098 XH"
 country = "Netherlands"

> 

Reviewer: @royarends agreed to be co-author! Yay!

```suggestion

[[author]]
initials = "R."
surname = "Arends"
fullname = "Roy Arends"
organization = "ICANN"
[author.address]
 email = "roy.arends@icann.org"
```

[[author]]
initials="W."
surname="Toorop"
fullname="Willem Toorop"
organization = "NLnet Labs"
[author.address]
 email = "willem@nlnetlabs.nl"
[author.address.postal]
 street = "Science Park 400"
 city = "Amsterdam"
 code = "1098 XH"
 country = "Netherlands"
%%%

.# Abstract

This document describes a method called "dry-run DNSSEC" that allows for
testing DNSSEC deployments without affecting the DNS service in case of

> configuration errors. It accomplishes that by introducing a new DS Type Digest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DNSSEC errors. It accomplishes that by introducing a new DS Type Digest
```

> configuration errors. It accomplishes that by introducing a new DS Type Digest

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configuration errors. It accomplishes this by introducing a new DS Type Digest
```

Author: I don't see a difference in the suggested text.

Algorithm that signals to validating resolvers that dry-run DNSSEC is used for
the zone. DNSSEC errors are then reported with DNS Error Reporting, but the

> bogus answer is withheld and instead resolvers fallback from dry-run DNSSEC and
> provide the answer they would normally produce for the zone. Further options
> are presented for testing key rollovers with this method and an option for
> clients to opt-in for dry-run DNSSEC errors and allow for end-to-end DNSSEC
> testing.

Reviewer: We don't have a specific option for key-rollover testing, right? It is just a dry-run DS introducing the new algorithm I think.

```suggestion
bogus response is withheld. Instead resolvers fallback from dry-run DNSSEC and
provide the response that would have been answered without the presence of a dry-run DS.
A further option is presented for
clients to opt-in for dry-run DNSSEC errors and allow for end-to-end DNSSEC
testing.
```

{mainmatter}

# Introduction

DNSSEC was introduced to provide DNS with data origin authentication and data
integrity. This introduced quite an amount of complexity and fragility to the
DNS which in turn still hinders general adoption. When an operator decides to
publish a newly signed zone there is no way to realistically check that DNS
will not break for the zone.

This document describes a method called "dry-run DNSSEC" that gives confidence

> to operators to adopt DNSSEC by introducing a new special DS Type Digest

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to operators to adopt DNSSEC by introducing a newly defined DS Type Digest
```

Author: Added

Algorithm. Resolvers that don't support the algorithm continue to treat the
delegation as insecure [@RFC6840, see, section 5.2]. Validating resolvers are
signaled to treat the delegation as being in an intermediate test step for

> DNSSEC. Valid answers yield authentic data (AD) responses. Clients that expect
> the AD flag can already profit from the transition. Invalid answers instead of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DNSSEC. Valid answers yield authentic data (AD) responses. Therefore, clients that expect
the AD flag can already profit from the transition. Invalid answers instead of
```

> the AD flag can already profit from the transition. Invalid answers instead of
> SERVFAIL yield the insecure data. This is of course not proper data integrity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the AD flag can already profit from the transition. Invalid answers instead of
SERVFAIL yield the response that would have been answered when no dry-run
DS would have been present in the parent. For zones that had only dry-run DS RRs
in the parent, an invalid answer yields an insecure response.

This is of course not proper data integrity
```

but the delegation should not be considered DNSSEC signed at this point.

> Together with DNS Error Reporting support, which is essential for dry-run

Reviewer: We can create a link for this in the back... will do that shortly.

```suggestion
Together with DNS Error Reporting [@DNS-ERROR-REPORTING] support, which is essential for dry-run
```

DNSSEC, DNSSEC health is reported back to the operator.

The signed zone is publicly deployed but DNSSEC configuration errors cannot
break DNS resolution yet. DNSSEC health feedback can pinpoint potential issues
back to the operator. When the operator is confident that the DNSSEC adoption
does not introduce DNS breakage, the real DS record can be published on the
parent zone and that concludes the actual DNSSEC deployment.

Dry-run DNSSEC can further be used on already singed zones to test key
rollovers. In this case a dry-run DS record for the future key is used next to

> the current DS record which itself needs to be also presented in the dry-run
> format. Validating resolvers that understand dry-run DNSSEC first try to

Reviewer: Why does the current DS needs to be present as dry-run as well?

```suggestion
the current DS record. Validating resolvers that understand dry-run DNSSEC first try to
```

Author: To simulate the resolver's DS picking behavior.

validate with a dry-run DS before falling back to real DSes.

For further end-to-end DNS testing, a new EDNS0 option code is introduced that
a client can send along with a query to a validating resolver. This signals
validating resolvers that the client has opted-in to DNSSEC errors for dry-run

> delegations. The resolver still uses DNS Error Reporting for dry-run errors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
delegations. The resolver still uses DNS Error Reporting [@DNS-ERROR-REPORTING] for dry-run errors
```

                        1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |           Key Tag             |  Algorithm    |    DRY-RUN    |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | Digest Type   |                                               /
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+            Digest                             /
   /                                                               /
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

Validating resolvers encountering such a DS record will know to mark this
delegation as dry-run DNSSEC and extract the actual Type Digest Algorithm and
Digest from the dry-run DS Digest field.

Validating resolvers that have no knowledge for the DRY-RUN DS Type Digest
Algorithm MUST disregard the DS record as per [@RFC6840, see, section 5.2].

## DNSSEC Error Reporting {#dnssec-error-reporting}

The main purpose of the dry-run DNSSEC proposal is to be able to monitor
potential DNS breakage when adopting DNSSEC for a zone. The main tool to do

> that is DNSSEC Error Reporting [citation needed].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that is DNS Error Reporting [@DNS-ERROR-REPORRTING].
```

parties to still affect the zone. This should be treated as a warning that
dry-run DNSSEC is not an end solution but rather a temporarily intermediate
test step of a zone going secure.

Parent zones that provide signed delegations to child zones should be aware
that by using dry-run DNSSEC (e.g., testing a key roll to a stronger algorithm
key) they risk the DNSSEC status of the child zones. If the trust chain becomes
invalid between parent and child because of dry-run DNSSEC the child zone will
be treated as insecure.

# IANA Considerations

## A New Wet-Run EDNS0 Option

This document updates the IANA registry for EDNS0 options, currently called
"DNS EDNS0 Option Codes (OPT)". The following entry has been added:

Value          TBD
Name           Wet-Run DNSSEC
Status         Standard
Reference      This document

## A New DRY-RUN DS Type Digest Algorithm

This document updates the IANA registry for digest types in DS records,
currently called "Delegation Signer (DS) Resource Record (RR) Type Digest
Algorithms".  The following entry has been added:

Value          TBD
Digest Type    DRY-RUN
Status         OPTIONAL (MANDATORY?)

# Acknowledgements

> This document is based on an idea by Yorgos Thessalonikefs and Willem Toorop.
> Roy Arends contributed the structure of the dry-run DS for the digest type and
> the digest content containing the intended digest type.

Reviewer: We don't need to Acknowledge ourselves :)

```suggestion
```

Author: Maybe :) I was looking at the acknowledgment section of DNSSEC Error Reporting

Martin Hoffmann contributed the idea of using the DS record of an already
signed zone also as a dry-run DS in order to facilitate testing key rollovers.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<reference anchor='DNS-ERROR-REPORTING' target='https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-dnsop-dns-error-reporting'>
    <front>
        <title>DNS Error Reporting</title>
        <author fullname="Roy Arends" initials="R." surname="Arends" />
        <author fullname="Matt Larson" initials="M." surname="Larson" />
        <date/>
    </front>
</reference>

```

break DNS resolution yet. DNSSEC health feedback can pinpoint potential issues
back to the operator. When the operator is confident that the DNSSEC adoption
does not introduce DNS breakage, the real DS record can be published on the
parent zone and that concludes the actual DNSSEC deployment.

Dry-run DNSSEC can further be used on already singed zones to test key
rollovers. In this case a dry-run DS record for the future key is used next to
the current DS record which itself needs to be also presented in the dry-run
format. Validating resolvers that understand dry-run DNSSEC first try to
validate with a dry-run DS before falling back to real DSes.

For further end-to-end DNS testing, a new EDNS0 option code is introduced that
a client can send along with a query to a validating resolver. This signals
validating resolvers that the client has opted-in to DNSSEC errors for dry-run
delegations. The resolver still uses DNS Error Reporting [@DNS-ERROR-REPORTING] for dry-run errors
but instead of the insecure answer it provides the client with the SERVFAIL
answer, same as with actual DNSSEC. These clients are called "wet-run clients".

> 

Reviewer 2: I expect something like this (stolen from DNSSEC Error Reporting) here

`The main purpose of the dry-run DNSSEC proposal is to be able to monitor potential DNS breakage when adopting DNSSEC for a zone. The main tool to do that is DNS Error Reporting [@DNS-ERROR-REPORTING].`

Digest from the dry-run DS Digest field.

Validating resolvers that have no knowledge for the DRY-RUN DS Type Digest
Algorithm MUST disregard the DS record as per [@RFC6840, see, section 5.2].

## DNSSEC Error Reporting {#dnssec-error-reporting}

The main purpose of the dry-run DNSSEC proposal is to be able to monitor
potential DNS breakage when adopting DNSSEC for a zone. The main tool to do
that is DNS Error Reporting [@DNS-ERROR-REPORTING].

Operators that want to use dry-run DNSSEC SHOULD support DNSSEC Error Reporting
and have a reporting agent in place to receive the error reports.

Implementations that support dry-run DNSSEC MUST also support DNSSEC Error
Reporting and report any DNSSEC errors for the dry-run zone to the
designated report agent.

## Parent zone records {#parent-zone-records}

The only change that needs to happen for dry-run DNSSEC is for the parent to
be able to publish the dry-run DS record. If the parent accepts DS records from
the child, the child needs to provide the dry-run DS record. If the parent does
not accept DS records and generates the DS records from the DNSKEY, support for

> generating the dry-run DS record when needed should be added to the parent if

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
generating the dry-run DS record, when needed, should be added to the parent if
````
This makes this sentence easier to read imo

Author: Added
